Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you. Thank you friends. Great. Warm greetings. Yay.
So we're back. And yeah, as we do, we'll just really connect to the essential motivation,
the essential goodness, the essential precious opportunity we have to be here together. So
we'll do that by activating our joy and appreciation, our renunciation, doing this really quality,
meaningful activity and time together, studying, reflecting on, and implementing the teachings
of the Buddha and the Gurumbhache, the lineage in our lives and our minds right now. So we'll
shine that on or enhance it or awaken it or brighten it. And then part of that is bodhichitta,
the motivation for why we're doing this. It's really to sincerely help all beings, all the
limitless sentient beings be free of all types of suffering and the causes of suffering so
they can be happy. The causes of happiness, essentially recognize their own nature, their
essential goodness at nature of mind and be free forever. And then thirdly, to reactivate
that purity view of true nature as it expresses itself without being obscured, deluded, blocked,
shut down in any way as pure nature naturally kind of manifests as experience. And we're
really connecting to that right now in our own experience, what we see, what we hear,
our own awareness and kind of enliven that, reconnect with renunciation, bodhichitta and
pure perception. Just kind of turn that on now.
Thank you, friends. It's always a very special privileged opportunity to get to reflect on
the Dharma with you all and in my own mind. I always see this as a personal reminder to
myself, just anything that I could say. It's just something that I know for myself. It's
something I really need to care for and put attention to and nurture in my own mind and
my own heart. So that's very valuable for me to have this opportunity to kind of dig
into some things that are meaningful and personal to me, including of course, Buddha Dharma,
precious lineage teachings, and then to just kind of open up some inquiries for myself
and for others if you find them helpful or useful. And that's wonderful, kind of like
look at different precious aspects of the Buddha Dharma. So the title of this talk, which
is kind of a little bit freewheeling today. It's something that I've been thinking about
for so long and just hadn't had too much time to really kind of formulate into some kind
of a contemplation together, but the topic is humility and receptivity, how we face the
immensity of the bodhisattva's task. So humility and receptivity, how we face the immensity
of the bodhisattva's task. So yeah, we'll jump right in. The path is long. It's long. I think
it's a really good like kind of adult mature kind of adult version of Dharma to really
just recognize that the path is long and the path is very surprising. We really don't know
what's up ahead. And so for especially for bodhisattva's who are kind of trying to apply
the Sutra Mahayana approach, this bodhisattva view, courageous for the enlightenment of
all beings, every being, this is such a big view, a tremendously big view, not just all
humans or everyone on this planet or all sentient beings, even all manifest and unmanifest reality.
Like we're taking the biggest view possible here. We're going to care for everything,
our own emotions, our own thoughts, ourselves, our relationships, our friends, our enemies,
our strangers for as long as it takes. So it's good to paint a picture a little bit
of the immensity of this project. We're all a part of this story that is really happening
right now in real time, the immensity of the bodhisattva view, infinite sentient beings,
infinite, not just a big, big, big, big, big, big, big, big number, but it just keeps going.
Not just here in this time in this place, but everywhere, all beings everywhere, all
types of beings, anything with sentience with a mind and they're in the dirt and the sky
and the ground and the ocean and other planets and other dimensions seen and unseen, known
and unknown, infinite sentient beings. We're really trying to open our heart like the bravery
that it takes to just consider that. May I continue to help as helpfully as I can, as
skillfully as I can, every single being until they completely wake up from the nightmare
of samsara. May I learn all the techniques that it takes to help beings wake up. This
is such a big view. This is such a big view. This is such a big view. I can't even wake
myself up for a minute. Try changing one habit, you know. We've tried that. Try to change
one habit. In myself, it takes a lot of work, a lot of work. Just mundane, obvious habits
like eat more greens or something. Obvious. It really takes a lot of effort and it would
make me happier, eat more greens. How are we going to help all these beings, all the
habits, all the deluded thoughts, all the mistaken perceptions, all the not seeing,
the ignorance. Just not seeing how good everyone is, how good the situation is. This is already
a pure realm, right? That's what the Tantra teachings say of the Buddha and Guru Ramachand.
It's already a pure realm, but we don't see that. Everyone has Buddha nature, but we don't
see that. I don't see that. But we're aspiring to try to see this. We're aspiring to always
have joy and contentment, deep gratitude, deep appreciation, to see the goodness in
others first. Eventually, to only see the goodness in others. Eventually, to not trying
to pretend or anything. We're not applying an antidote or we're not transforming something,
deluded into something non-deluded. We're just seeing clearly as it is perfectly, without
mistake, just pure view, enlightened view, unmistaken view. This is such an immense project.
All beings, as long as it takes forever, may I come back and be born again. It's really
important to see the immensity of that, because that's really what we've committed to as Bodhis
Sarfas, as aspiring Bodhis Sarfas. To see that in like, what a precious vision. We look
around and there's so much struggle and suffering. We look at ourselves, there's so much struggle
and suffering. May I be the balm that heals all suffering. It's such a big view we're
taking on here, and how amazing. We've done that. We're taking this on. We've committed
to it. We promise. We aspire. We activate this bodhicitta until all beings are free of suffering
and the causes of suffering, until all beings are completely enlightened, every single being.
I will come back. I will keep helping. I will do whatever it takes. I'll learn whatever
language I need to learn, whatever computer language I need to learn. I'll keep coming
back to this in any form that's helpful. It's such a big commitment. And where does this
really lead? In my own mind, it really leads to the just matter of fact, super practical
ground level assessment of I need help. It's too big. Right now I need help. All beings
forever free all of them. To even try to sustain the aspiration for a long period of time,
it takes a lot of energy. What does that really mean? I need help. What I'm talking about
in this is really a deep, heartfelt, genuine humility. What an amazing wish to be whatever
it takes for as long as it takes to help soothe all beings and have them be completely free,
for them to wake up in their own way for me to match that and to help that. What a beautiful,
beautiful, beautiful aspiration. And I need help because I'm not awakened. I'm not even
partially awakened. So this is deep humility, a really deep humility. What an amazing wish
to have. What an amazing path to pursue, to walk step by step. So what is this really
genuine, healthy humility to face the immensity of the bodhisattva's task? I made a little
list that I was just thinking of in my head. What does this mean? Really genuine humility.
This isn't from like an official text or something, but just in my own mind, I mean, it's mainly
inspired from Ven. K. Paramitche's book, Ceaseless Echoes of the Great Silence. It's a commentary
in the Harth Sutra, Prashna Paramita, where they go through the six paramitas, which Ven.
K. Paramitche went through very extensively, each of these six paramitas, and the three
types of each of these six paramitas. He did this over months when COVID-19 first happened.
And we're all in lockdown, and he took the opportunity to have a big massive retreat
mode for everyone who wanted to for free. And he went through these six paramitas and
the three aspects of each of the six paramitas. So this is largely inspired kind of this list
and this inquiry too, by that, by Rimeche's teachings, and also by their book, Ceaseless
Echoes of the Great Silence, by the Kemper Rimeche's. So what is healthy humility? Healthy
humility acknowledges that we're not alone. I'm not doing this alone. This is not all
up to me. I didn't make these clothes, I didn't teach, I didn't learn this language on my
own, I didn't create it. In so many ways, I depend on others in the world. All the amazing
things that others have already done, they've already figured out, they've already offered.
I'm using right now, we're all using right now this technology, these building structures,
the Buddha's teachings, he figured out the four noble truths, the six paramitas, I didn't
have to figure any of that out. I just show up and then I just, four noble truths, what
are the four noble truths? Then I just try to remember them and apply them, but I didn't
come up with that. I just totally received that as a present, the biggest present possible.
Merry Christmas to me, so big, I didn't have to do any of that work. We all depend on each
other and the world, we depend on so much, we are not alone. When none of us is an island,
that is a mistaken view. We might feel like that sometimes, but we're really together,
we're really connected. This genuine humility sees that really, I depend on so much. It's
not all, I didn't do it all. I really, then this gratitude comes, so much gratitude for
experience, for life, for what our parents have done for us, our siblings, even the difficulties,
like these big opportunities to learn and go deeper. Humility sees clearly, wow, how
amazing to get to rely on all these, all this effort and ingenuity and just a beautiful organic
naturalness of complex life. Genuine, healthy humility recognizes life is complex. It's
not easy, it's not simple, it's very nuanced. Humility really takes that seriously. Free
all beings, so complex. Free myself, it's so complex. Wow, so there's an opportunity to
have a wow moment there. So complex, so amazing how this all keeps going. And we didn't have
to do anything, it just keeps going. That's really extraordinary. Genuine humility sees
this is complex. It's not just simple, cut and dry, black and white. It's just really
profound. Interdependence is very mysterious. And that's another indication of genuine humility.
It doesn't try to resolve the mystery. It might try to get a little bit better orientation,
so it's not so daunting or haunting or too much. We can orient things a little bit, have
healthy placeholders, get little footholds. But genuine humility keeps looking, keeps
looking closer and closer and closer, just like the Buddha said, when we study and contemplate,
we look sharper, more clear, and we see more of the inconceivable nature, more of the vast
relative spectrum of experience. So on the relative level, much more subtle detail. On
the absolute level, it's just cannot be known according to any conceptual frame. It's inconceivable
according to any model. It doesn't work within duality mind. So instead of trying to resolve
the mystery, we try to actually connect with the mystery and let the mystery inform us,
strengthen us, grow us, stretch us. And really healthy humility does that. The mystery makes
the interest and the enthusiasm open more. Wow, all these beings, how can I help? How
can I help you? How can I help me? All of a sudden it becomes a really big creative
opportunity. And also really genuine humility is so practical. Really, what does that mean?
How can I help? That's a really practical question. That's not just some poetic kind
of like pie in the sky view. Like really on the ground, how can I help? And my own emotions
are tumbling and rumbling. And when other people are going through things or just when
life keeps happening, how can I help? What serves now? Genuine humility really checks
into now, this time, this place, right now. That's where we can really have the, that's
where we have power to make an impact and to be impacted right now. It means we have to
check in with right now. You right now, me right now. I have to like check in with that
and it's there. It's available to do. My mind's here. My body's here. Other people, it's all
this kind of our local setting is right here waiting for us to care about it, to tune into
it. Genuine humility wants to tune into instead of just reformulate everything, take over.
Genuine humility softens and inquires, leans in. All of a sudden, like how to save all beings,
free all beings, awaken all beings. It's much more of a curious inquiry. It's not a, there's
not one universal answer. It's always context sensitive. It's always specific to here and
now. What does it mean to serve a being, to serve all beings, to really genuinely effectively
help? It's very practical and it's very context specific. Genuine humility sees it, you know,
in my own mind. I see I have very specific limits. There's so much I don't know. That's
not the whole story. I also have really awesome stuff too. There's a lot of good there too.
In my mind, there's talents and there's limits. There's really both, but we, and we have to
hold both. I'm just a limited sentient being, but this is like, we all have very unique
things we're kind of sharing with it. This at the party, you know, we all have these
stories, these experiences and we can learn and listen to each other and share them. And
why we're all limited beings. Yay. We're all part of it. The team, you know, we can relate
to each other through that. We all have these broken experiences, these hurts and this wounds
and also these beautiful things, these just like unnameable, amazing things, these quiet
little moments and just all ordinary everyday things, you know, brushing the teeth and get
up and I don't want to wake up and I want to wake up. What's for dinner? Oh, I got to
go to the bathroom again. And this is like a lot of common things that we can be, you
know, if we, if we choose to see, oh, that's a way we have this together, you know, not
only difference, but there's beautiful differences too. All of a sudden, there's an opportunity.
This humility really cares for the differences and the commonalities, the limits and the
talents. It's not just playing one side or the other. It's not, it's just really not
so much playing favorites. It's trying to really, the humility is like, really, what
is the richness of this moment right now? And part of seeing the limits is we don't
have control for so many things. All these things we didn't create, they were a part
of, we showed up mid story to almost everything. We don't have control, but if we don't try
to make it our way, there's an amazing power in it. It's already happening. We just have
to kind of more go with it, go with the flow. All these chemical reactions are already happening.
All these, the energy of mind is already happening. All these patterns and cycles and seasons
and days and nights and karmic patterns, they're already happening. We can use it. We can go
with that river of energy. We can use the creative power, but we have to be creative
about it and not just be hurt by it or used by it or always fighting it, trying to make
it my way. Instead, we get humble. What's happening? Why does this keep happening? It's
already happening. We get curious. How does this work? It's like a deep Buddhist question.
What's going on here? How does this work? How can I work with this better? Work with
this better? Not be so against it. Not just use it either. How can I learn from this?
How can I care for this more? How can I appreciate this more? Be respectful of this more, and
it'll just kind of give back. There's so many things that healthy humility brings. It's
directive. It learns from its mistakes. Humility keeps going. It's not self-satisfied. It wants
to learn more, more beings, more knowledge, more language, more skills. Like Sakya Pandita
said, even if this is the last day of your life, use it to study. Activate your bodhicitta.
Even Guru Rinpoche said that. If you come across a hammer, pick up the hammer, generate bodhicitta,
and use the hammer. The next time you come across a hammer and you touch the hammer,
it'll reawaken your bodhicitta. Constantly trying to use this experience to just activate
your bodhicitta. To keep going. Genuine humility sees that so many beings know so much more
than me. And in the context of Buddhism, or just more generally, elder wisdom, we're really
not the first one to go through this, and we're not the only one, and we're not the
best one, and we're not the worst one. We're not the one. Neo. We might think we are. So
many beings have already looked so carefully at the mystery. They didn't resolve the mystery,
they just saw clearly what the mystery was. And they're clear seeing awaken them. This
elder wisdom, what does it do? It doesn't help us. It doesn't do the path for us. It
doesn't make it just easy. Otherwise all the beings would have woken up now. There's so
many countless beings around. Buddhas. There's so many Buddhas around. There's so many sentient
beings around. And my sentient perception. So what does it do for us? It gives us a heads
up. The elder wisdom lets us know a little bit what's around the corner. What we can't
see yet. How does an enlightened being perceive things? They say, you know, that's such a
valuable knowledge to know what's maybe coming up. And we can check in and try to see if it
makes sense. And we can test it. They like provide the whole path to actually test it.
How amazing to have all this lineage wisdom and these living noble beings. And they never
do the path for us, but they can prevent a lot of kind of same old habits, same old mistakes,
same old wasted time. Infinite sentient life, infinite samsara from this beginningless time.
They can show us the techniques to purify all this karma so quickly, but they can't
do it for us. But they can show us the easiest way to do it. And we still have to do it.
They can show us the best way to tune into what's happening right now. And then refine
that view more and more. More subtly, more fully, more inclusively experience what's
happening right now in a full spectrum way and increasing humility gets more and more
overflowing with insight. Why? It really knows more clearly what it doesn't know. Genuine
humility is really honest about what it doesn't know, which is almost everything. It's also
really, really honest about the unknown unknowns. Like I don't know. There's so much I don't
know. I don't know. I find that every day I learned more things. I have no idea they
were happening. There's so many fields of knowledge. There's so many expert people.
There's history so fast. There's so much I don't know. And there's so much I have no
idea that I don't know. And genuine humility makes these two clearer. Both like we have
a question and we really have no clue even how to begin kind of like engaging that, responding.
And then there's so many things. We don't even have a question about it. It's so far
over our head. It doesn't even come up as a question yet. And this lineage wisdom shows
us both. What's around the corner pretty close? What's around the corner really far away?
And so if we have humility, like how does such benefit? We have this full path view.
And it makes it so much easier and so much more empowered. And so much more practical.
And it really becomes a question of trust. How can we trust? When someone says something's
way around the corner and we can't see it for ourselves. Really genuine humility makes
us become more receptive to life. We're more available to be moved by life. And in secular
terms is called to bear witness. We're more empowered to really authentically bear witness.
Even if we can't do anything, we can just be with people. We can just be with the tragedy
of life and the beauty of it and the horror and the just in love. There's so many things
to love in life. And we don't have to do anything. We can just be with it. We can just appreciate
it. We can just suffer through it and be with it in that. We can just offer company connection.
Wow, it's really hard. Oh, this is so beautiful. We're opening ourselves to more of the variety
of what's happening. That's called our field of karmic vision is expanding. We're seeing
more clearly. We're including more interdependence. We're being moved by it more. And we're also
tuning into like how we're being moved. And if there's other ways we'd like to move with
that flow, the river that are more helpful, more empowering, more heart opening, more
clarifying, then we start to see those patterns more clearly when we're really humble. And
all of a sudden we tune into others more and we see what might be a little more helpful
in this situation. Oh, just don't do anything. Don't say anything. Or give this gift. Or
just be kind. Just pray from a distance. Or just forgive. All of a sudden we tune into
all these patterns. So many beings. And then when we tune in in that way, it makes us so
much more interested in their experience and their stories. And our personal story gets
a little more ho-hum. I know my story pretty well. I mean, there's so many kind of distorted
things I don't see about myself. But more or less, I know my, you know, drakpa story.
And we start tuning in with others. Wow. It becomes really fascinating. So many other beings,
so many stories, so many experiences, so many insights that I don't personally have to go
through in a way. They're also giving, they're like, it's like elders. They're helping me
see something I haven't seen before. I haven't been in their shoes. I don't know. And they're
showing me what's it like from in that way through that experience, like a little bit
of an insight. And all of a sudden the view opens a little. And so that's what receptivity
really does. It opens our view. We're willing to have our own view, our own frames open.
And the real honest part of that path, if we're talking about adult Buddha Dharma, the
real honest part of that path is when we open our view, it really does feel like dying.
It's a breaking. We have to break our pattern and remake a new pattern. Break and remake
our frames, our views. Why do we break a view? Why do we extend it, stretch it, open it?
Because it's too limited. It's too tight. It's not actually big enough to include the
rich, vast nature of reality. So at a certain point of our view, it starts really kind of
bursting at the seams because life is too much for it. Our view, our box is too small
and we have to open it. Those growing pains that we've all been through. And it's a part
of samsara. And here we're talking about extending a view and going through that kind of tension,
the difficulty, the dis-ease, the uncomfortability, the fear, the new knowing, a new ways of
knowing.
They always come along with having a bigger view. Feeling more fully, connecting more
richly with people, bearing witness to other people's stories, their experiences, their
losses and loves. It really aches. And then it takes time for things to gel more, for
our view to expand and kind of settle. It takes time and we need help. It's a deep humility.
We really need help. We're not talking about getting a final view as if it's the final
answer to every question. We're talking about a flexibility of moving in between views in
ways that are really helpful for other people according to their views. The emptiness is
the flexibility to move in and out and between views. Our frames. Because that's what reality
does. It's called interdependence. Dependent arising. All of a sudden with humility, we're
a part, an important part, an essential part of a much bigger whole, a much bigger story.
It's so empowering. It's not just me. It's not just me alone. That genuine humility.
So I've really been careful to say this healthy humility or genuine humility. What does this
all come down to in a Buddhist context? Lineage. Lineage. Lineage. These noble beings who've
seen so clearly and so vastly, who have this deep, really lived experience, at least first
Bhoomi bodhisattva experience, of really being with the true nature as it is, and really
commanding that aspiration to free all beings for as long as it takes, no matter what. They
have that bodhicitta. It's on and it's uninterruptedly on. It doesn't waver anymore. It's just
always
on. Then it's the question of having some of these habits. This is through the 10 Bhoomis,
these habits, the old karmic habits, still have to shed. We still have to stretch, grow.
But that's the big game changer, this first Bhoomi. And there are noble beings in the
world now. And their teachings are all around. And they can help us go through that process.
And our humility, all of a sudden, they're like, wow, we see them all over. We really
have genuine humility. There's so many noble beings in the world right now. Obvious ones.
Not trying to figure out how that rock is an actual emanated Buddha or something. Not
trying to like, because the Buddha's teachings said there's mandalas everywhere. And I'm
talking about obvious, apparent noble beings that anyone with a duludu perception like
myself can see, like as holy as Dalai Lama, such a noble being. So obvious. And they're
around and their teachings are all over and we can apply them. And we can ask, I mean,
really, it's like such an amazing time. But it's really good. I found it's really good
to say and to remember and to emphasize that it really is a stretching process. Becoming
humble, deeply humble, surrendering. Really having deep veneration. Like deep veneration,
like what we're doing with prostrations in Indra, like deep veneration for the nature,
the nature inside, the nature outside, those who've realized it fully, my own nature that's
like opening up a little more. It's really deep veneration for all things all around
for this amazing process we're a part of. Such a deep veneration. But that little stretching
is really part of it. It's part of the path. And we need to expect it. Because if no one
gives us a heads up that it's a little difficult, once that comes, the tension comes and we
actually have to grow our frame. And that means we have to kind of like give up some
old habits and make new healthy habits. It requires a lot of participation, doesn't it?
It's a lot of participation. And it's so good. It's so worthwhile. So worthwhile. But we're
intentionally kind of letting these noble beings help us get a little bit of it's called
a hormesis, hormesis. They're giving us a little bit, a little bit of stress, just enough
for our system to be a little curious about it, you know. And then it starts to adapt,
get a little more flexible. There's a little rug pulling. There's a little tension. And
it's just in this Goldilocks range. It's just enough little friction that our system has
to wake up. And our mindfulness has to turn on. Oh, what's going on? This is a little
different. I'm not sure what's going on. It's like homeopathy. It's also they say it's like
that process is like in when you exercise, it's like your muscles literally have to tear
a little for them to strengthen more, to have stronger bonds. That hormesis process, like
if we get in a trusting relationship with a noble being, that's part of the process.
They're going to give us a little bit that's a little beyond what we can handle. So we
can grow, adapt, get more creative, juggle a little more. And what we're trying to do
is get so much so that we can do that with ourselves. We push our own buttons. We don't
let things get too stale and static. We remain constant and reliable and really genuinely
humble and in reverence of life, of this process, the process of the path, not the contents
of the path, not the visions and the experiences and the things, but the process, the unfolding,
the opening, the insights, not so much the what we're insightful about, but being in
a phase of insight, being in an extraordinary seeing. The Vipassana itself, the point is
to stay in Vipassana. It's not just to see stuff, it's to stay in Vipassana. That's the
union of Shyamata and Vipassana, to stay in insight all the time and to not get hooked
up on any detail, to care for the details, but to not grab a detail. Because then we
lock into a view and then we can't help others according to what's the content of their story,
of their experience. We kind of basically glue ourselves too tightly to certain frames when
we need to have that flexibility to seamlessly kind of move in and out and be responsive
to what is happening right now in real time with those who are around and with our own
minds and our own hearts. Wow, we have this lineage and there's by so many ways we can,
the Buddha taught, Jigme Lingpa taught, Satsum Lingpa taught, so many of these great masters
taught how we can look into the lineage to see whether it's authentic or not, according
to Borichitta standards. There's so many teachings they gave on this, how to test what's a
qualified
teacher, what's a qualified student, and it's really worth engaging that. And also to re-engage
it because then we can reactivate our appreciation for these amazing qualified teachers that
are around. We can really kind of bring that back freshly to mind like wow, what an opportunity
to be able to apply their teachings. And when things get rough, things get a little tight,
they get a little tense or something, to refresh and be like wow, this is actually like such
a big opportunity to grow further. That's why in these six parmitu practices, the three
points that really kind of like freshened in my mind that's really kind of around this
topic of humility and receptivity is patience. Patience with hardships on the path. That's
the second type of patience. The third type of patience is patience with the ups and downs
of life. Patience with hardships on the path, knowing it's going to come. That process of
opening, of inquiring, of staying fresh, it's very demanding. It really requires us to keep
showing up. It cares about us that much. It really keeps asking us to participate. And
it's so kind because then it just matches us with however far we're willing to go. Then
reality does that. It's kind of extraordinary how that happens. And these living teachers
do that too. Patience with hardships on the path. And patience with the ups and downs
of life. Samsara. As long as we're in duality mind cycles, then it's going to be, or it's
going to bang around against stuff and lose things that we love and get things we don't
want. It's just part of it. So that, and I'm not saying that's easy, patience is a really
hard one for me. Patience to be with. Be with it. The hardship, the ups and downs. The third
part of the paramitas that really kind of struck me is when we get into the joyful effort
paramita. Unflinching paramita, that's the kind of topic here. Unflinching paramita is
not flinching with the immensity of the bodhisattva's task. That joyful effort. We're going to keep
going so immense when you really get the impact of the immensity of that task. Don't flinch.
That's the first type of joyful effort. Such a noble, such a noble wish. Insatiable joyful
effort. I think this is the second type. I think it's the third type. But no matter what
good we've done, how many beings we've helped, one, two, whatever experience we had in practice,
insatiable as it keeps wanting to do more. More help, more helpful. Help even again. Let
me have that be more effective, more heartfelt, more humble, more connected. Insatiable joyful
effort. It doesn't get self satisfied with, oh, I did this and I built that and had that.
It's not satisfied with its list of accomplishments. That happened. Okay, this is great. We should
rejoice in any good thing we do and use it as fuel to do even more. We should really
do that. Yeah. So that's the second joyful effort. And the third is unceasing. And that's what
these
noble bodhisattvas do. Day and night, all the time, unceasing joyful effort. It's a lovely
experience for them. They've really seen the nature uninterruptedly. Wow, how amazing. So
noble to behold such beings. And that's really kind of what comes down to this lineage. Like
really, the lineage, what has the lineage done for us? The lineage, I mean, it has done
so much for us. But one amazing thing the lineage has done for us is that when life
gets really hard, the lineage has given us all kinds of sets of heuristics called rules
of thumb, things to remember. That when life gets hard, when some sorrow gets too much,
the Dharma lineage has given us so many systems of these simple, easy to remember tips. And
so it's too hard and we start shutting down. We can remember the four noble truths. We
can remember the four turnings of our mind to Dharma. We can remember the four seals,
sometimes the nine yanas. We can remember bodhicitta. We can remember the six paramitas.
And these are all complete systems. They're like in Longchenpa's treasury of pith instructions.
It's like hundreds of pages of all these complete exhaustive systems of how you can cut up the
pie of reality into these completely 100% contained systems. And they're all these super easy
to remember pith instructions, these heuristics, rules of thumb. And if we can remember them,
study them some, make them a little bit kind of more easy to pop into our minds, then when
things get really hard, we can have an extra handhold, right? It's like a good example
is like if you're climbing, climbing, like literally rock climbing, free climbing, no
lines, and all of a sudden you get to a spot and you don't have a handhold or a foothold
and you are stuck and your body starts freezing and the fear of death starts happening. What
it clicks on, three points of contact. Always maintain three points of contact. It's a heuristic.
It's a rule of thumb. When everything else fails, the thing that clicks on and the Buddha
Dharma is filled with those and it's just a treasure trove of all this practical advice
that if we go into a few points like the Four Noble Truths, it's everything. It's the entire
Buddha Dharma. And we didn't have to figure out any of it. It was all just given to us.
The Buddha already taught this. These lineage masters have maintained this. It's still intact.
Whatever simple rules of thumb help us now, it's all there. And if we really pursue even
one of them, some lo-jung slogans, some pith instructions we receive from our personal
nature, it's enough. It's a complete path. And we can really keep going with that for
decades. This nundra practice is a complete path. Patermice did nundra 25 times and did
all the accumulations that said he did all the accumulations of nundra 25 times. It's
a complete path. And we have all these ways that we can like, if we get humble and we're
willing to see the immense preciousness of the Buddha Dharma that we've received, then
the immensity of the bodhisattva's task becomes, it really kind of radically shifts something
in our minds. And it can reawaken this courage that we can do this, that my nature is capable
of this. This Buddha nature is there and it's in everyone. And we have these paths and we
can test these paths and we can use this moment right now to awaken and to really tune in
to what's happening around us and inside of us and get really humble and really quiet
and really caring and really listen, really receive. And that's what all these noble beings
do. So it's, yeah, such a beautiful path. It's really such an amazingly beautiful path. And
we're not alone. So many beings have done it. There's so many noble beings around who
are doing it. There's so many invisible beings who are doing it, who are helping us and the
lineage is there. And if we really get humble and kind of quiet ourselves more and more
and more, that humility is going to connect us to all these resources that we have that
are just part of reality. And when the times get difficult, we feel disconnected, we get
lost, we can rely on some of these very, we can pull back, get a bird's eye view and rely
on some very basic essential teachings that will clarify so much and help us kind of get
a bigger perspective and to really kind of open up in a soft way and not in a severe
way. But all of a sudden, wow, I have an infinite time to connect with all these beings. That's
such a softer way to think of it. Instead of, oh, I have to endlessly go through birth
and death and the this and struggle and learn all this stuff. All this opportunity to like,
wow, I get another time to communicate with you. All of a sudden it becomes like a beautiful
opportunity. Like Maitreya said, going from garden to garden, strolling from garden to
garden like when we really turn into that Borichitta. And all of a sudden really it
becomes much more of a tremendously grateful opportunity that we have to keep doing this
practice together to study the Buddha Dharma and to learn little by little and open little
by little. So thank you, kind of meander around a little bit, but hopefully it was a nice,
some more of a stroll and less of a chaotic maze. Hope it was helpful. Thank you friends.
Just regarding humility and receptivity, something to also mention is that for one's
own path, like if we're trying to consider our own path, how's it going? How's my path
going? I think I've found that humility and our receptivity, our interest in kind of learning
new things and seeing in different ways is a really easy kind of litmus test for whether
our path is kind of like going in the right direction. And then similarly, if we're looking
for some guidance for a teacher who's reliable, those seem to be two qualities that really
are outstanding, like that someone's genuinely humble and also really curious about seeing
in new ways and they're kind of tuned in to what's going on around them. And like with
a lot of enthusiasm, so really receptive. I think those are two really clear, obvious
indications that, you know, just at the, you know, very face level that kind of to inspire
trust, at least in the beginning for like further inquiry into like seeing if that's
a trustable guide to rely on. Then thirdly, for humility with the great teachings like
Zogchen, it's very like clearly said that the essential practice, the essential practice
of Zogchen is guru yoga like we just did. And that's all about feeling a very close, warm
kind of sizzling connection to the lineage, like a really humble, open kind of willing
to receive the lineage blessings, really willing to connect to reality, the true nature. So
that's a kind of strong point there that that humility and that kind of receptivity is really
crucially important with these high, high practices like Zogchen, for example. And then
thirdly, or sorry, fourthly, that I really don't see a way around humility. If we're
really, I mean, talking about non-dual kind of waking up, if we're talking about wisdom
and seeing clearly, supreme seeing the way it's talked about in Buddhism, like non-dual
realization, then a deep humility will let us really clearly see like how demanding that
process is of being in a moment of wisdom is one thing, but sustaining that moment as
a meditation that integrates with all aspects of your life, that really requires a lot of
supports, a lot of relative supports. So we really have to connect in with a lot of skillful
means at that point, we have to be humble to receive that support and queued in to like
actually really pay attention to the support, the feedback we're getting from life, from
our experience to actually maintain that open view. And then even these noble beings who
are maintaining that view all the time, then the question of humility and receptivity is
constantly tuning in to the skillful means that are going to be most effective to helping
beings right now. So if they're not using the support to sustain their view, because
they're already sustaining their view, they're still queuing into all of the patterns at
play of dependent origination, so they can be most tuned in to what's skillful right
now to help the beings that are around them. So I thought to say that quickly. Thank you.